Augmented blueprint EP031 `telemetry_int` (#402)
kytos-ng/kytos: docs/blueprints/EP031.rst

  4. There will be no concerns about proxy ports and their mappings. These were addressed in Blueprint EP034.
  5. There is no need for persistent data. The **mef_eline** and **flow_manager** napps will persist their entries accordingly since **telemetry_int** will leverage **flow_manager**.
  6. This version won't require changes to the way the **mef_eline** napp works. However, a new value will be added each EVC's metadata attribute.

>   7. This specification assumes the data plane's pipeline is ready for INT, with multiple tables, and it assumes that **mef_eline** uses table 0. **telemetry_int** aims to use any table with an ID higher than **mef_eline**, for instance in this document, table 2. It also assumes that this higher table should be capable of exact matching on ``in_port`` and ``dl_vlan``, including on just one of these fields, just so both EVPLs and EVPLs flows are correctly supported.

Author: cc'ing @italovalcy @jab1982 regarding the requirement to support also EPL on table `"n"`. I left the requirement still higher level, but looks like we'll probably go for another table just for EPLs. I'll leave it up to you guys to confirm, since this is highly dependent on pipeline configuration architecture. The implementation to support another table shouldn't be too difficult, although if we still had a single one it'd be even easier to maintain and test.

If we do end up introducing a new table, we should also think about the concept of table group, that we introduced on [`of_multi_table` NApp](https://github.com/kytos-ng/of_multi_table/blob/master/openapi.yml#L164-L169), which in summary is reponsible for categorizing a set of flows that should always be installed in a particular table. So far `telemetry_int` only had a `base` group table (since up to this point it only required one extra table), so with a new table we probably want to split this into `int_evpl` and `int_epl` since it'll still have to follow `mef_eline`'s table groups `evpl` and `epl` which currently default to table 0 anyway.

Author: - EVPLs will use table 2 by default
- EPLs will use table 3 by default

Updated the text on https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/402/commits/2096fc5da5e675562feba9df0b584acd2e4818c5

  1 . The **telemetry_int** napp will start operating once **mef_eline** is loaded and EVCs and their flows are pushed to the data plane.

>   2. **telemetry_int** will listen for events *kytos/mef_eline.(redeployed_link_(up|down)|deployed|undeployed)* and *kytos.mef_eline.created* issued by **mef_eline**.

Author: Sure thing, yes, let's double check it:

- [`DELETE /DELETE /v2/evc/{circuit_id}` publishes `deleted`](https://github.com/kytos-ng/mef_eline/blob/master/main.py#L413) 
- [When it fails to redeploy due to link down publishes `error_redeploy_link_down`](https://github.com/kytos-ng/mef_eline/blob/master/main.py#L802)

Good catch, let's include them just so flows can get deleted too.

>   2. **telemetry_int** will listen for events *kytos/mef_eline.(redeployed_link_(up|down)|deployed|undeployed)* and *kytos.mef_eline.created* issued by **mef_eline**.

Author: Updated here 01d81216de904f8f8ce92ec59b74517923ac5a13

==========

>   1. Listening

Author: It'll be covered by `kytos.topology.updated`, since ultimately an interruption will also result in an `kytos.topology.updated` being published.

>   1. Listening

Author: Right, indeed, initially I was assuming that it'd behave like a down UNI, since I hoping that eventually it'd probably be going up again since it would still exist: 

> If a proxy port source or destination status changes to DOWN or DISABLED (or if the loop stoops being a loop) all of associated EVCs should be considered not active, similar to what has been implemented when a UNI changes its UP state. No flows should be removed. Currently, mef_eline doesn't allow an EVC to be deactivated, so this will need to be published via events, depending if an EVC also starts to use status and status_reason then interruptions can also be used.

But, indeed, it could actually just remove the flows and allow the traffic to fallback to `mef_eline`. It's to you @italovalcy and @jab1982 to decide the behavior you'd like to see here, flow removals and then eventually trying to deploy it again once it goes up or consistency results in positive might be the the smoothest option, what do you think?

>   1. Listening

Author: If we were to support this, we'd also need to keep track of the looped links and which EVCs are going over it and react accordingly, we'll need to keep track of proxy ports anyway so that wouldn't be too far away. Good thing that we do have the link timer up to also avoid too much unnecessary IO with FlowMods. When it goes up it could redeploy again. I'll wait for your confirmation, but indeed looks like falling back would be the optimal (and less surprising) approach.

>   1. Listening

Author: Final verdict: proxy port link down will remove INT flows, and when proxy port link goes up if the EVC is still up then it'll deploy again. I've updated text on https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/402/commits/a699943ca8326582898d230d4145db2d0f1b7849

>     1. *kytos/mef_eline.(removed|deployed|undeployed)*

Author: `undeployed` is needed if it ever gets disabled via an update.

>     2. *kytos.topology.updated*

Author: This is for keeping track of `proxy_interface` status changes, and also `proxy_port` metadata changes

VI. REST API
=============

  - ``POST /telemetry_int/v1/evc/enable`` body evc_ids: [] for bulk insertions, if empty, then enable all. If invalid or non-existing EVC_ID are provided, abort the entire operation with 4XX status code.

>   - ``POST /telemetry_int/v1/evc/disable`` body evc_ids: [] for bulk removals, if empty, then remove all. If invalid or non-existing EVC_ID are provided, abort the entire operation with 4XX status code.

Author: Yes

  - ``GET /telemetry_int/v1/evc`` list all INT-enabled EVCs.

>   - ``GET /telemetry_int/v1/evc_compare`` list and compare which telemetry_int flows are still coherent with EVC metadata status

Author: Right. Yes, thinking about it again, probably a `PATCH /telemetry_int/v1/evc/redeploy body evc_ids: []` would be handy, otherwise as you said you'd have to `/disable force` and then `/enable force`. I'll update the doc shortly, let me know if you'd be OK with it, it'd behave the same a `mef_eline` `redeploy`

>   - ``GET /telemetry_int/v1/evc_compare`` list and compare which telemetry_int flows are still coherent with EVC metadata status

Author: Included here 2fdcbdb7909c480383218ef8a4cb2f81f31aaec1

The **telemetry_int** napp will leverage the EVC's metadata attribute to create a new item, called `telemetry`. This new item will be a dictionary will the following values:

  * "status": "enabled|disabled"

>   * "status_reason": ["some_error"]

Author: Since we have certain events or asynchronous side effects that can happen in addition to a HTTP request from clients, then we can use `"status_reason"` here too to fill out any error (they'll be specified as we go, but basically they'll be enum string values).

- When configuring the proxy port, it always needs to be the lower interface number (which is also guaranteed by LLDP loop detection), e.g., if you have a loop between interface port number 5 and 6, you need to configure 5 as the proxy port. By this convention, the lower port will be the outgoing port for an incoming NNI traffic.

- Once an EVC is redeployed, ``telemetry_int`` will also redeploy accordingly. Also, to ensure fast convergence when handling link down for EVCs that have failover, it's expected that a typical query to stored flows since it's querying indexed fields will not add significant latency, this point will be observed, and we'll see if it'll perform as expected or if more optimization will be needed from ``telemetry_int`` perspective.

> - If a proxy port source or destination status changes to DOWN or DISABLED (or if the loop stoops being a loop) all of associated EVCs should be considered not active, similar to what has been implemented when a UNI changes its UP state. No flows should be removed. Currently, ``mef_eline`` doesn't allow an EVC to be deactivated, so this will need to be published via events, depending if an EVC also starts to use ``status`` and ``status_reason`` then interruptions can also be used.

Author: This requirement is still being discussed/refined here: https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/402/files#r1276699359

XI. Consistency
===============

> The **telemetry_int** napp might deploy a routine to evaluate the consistency of the telemetry flows as performed by the **mef_eline** napp. This implementation will be defined via field experience with Kytos. Ideally, the consistency check should also rely on ``sdntrace_cp`` and follow the same pattern as ``mef_eline``, except that also when trying to trace, it should test both UDP and TCP payloads, if any fails, then it should eventually try to redeploy. As of ``sdntrace_cp`` version ``2023.1`` it still doesn't completely support ``goto_table`` neither ``instructions``, so it needs to be augmented just so ``telemetry_int`` can eventually also rely on it. In the meantime, once an telemetry INT EVC is deployed it'll be considered enabled, including after controller reload, which might not be the case, but since ``flow_manager`` also has a consistency eventually even if flows are accidentally deleted on switches, then it'll push missing flows again.

Author: We'll need to discuss if for production you'll need the consistency check completely implemented too, on `sdntrace_cp` these would also be needed:

https://github.com/kytos-ng/sdntrace_cp/issues/103

https://github.com/kytos-ng/sdntrace_cp/issues/104

Reviewer: Yes, we will need to have consistency check completely implemented because otherwise, we can misclassify an EVC with INT enabled as working when it might not be fully functional.

Reviewer: Additionally, the consistency should also check if the proxy port is active and take actions accordingly.

Author: > Yes, we will need to have consistency check completely implemented because otherwise, we can misclassify an EVC with INT enabled as working when it might not be fully functional.

Right. So, we'll need to include this extra effort on `sdntrace_cp` then. @gretelliz let me know if you could collaborate on that part and if you think it's feasible, this epic here has high priority for the `2023.2` version it doesn't need immediate action, but should be on the top of the list.

Author: > Additionally, the consistency should also check if the proxy port is active and take actions accordingly.

@italovalcy @jab1982, we'll need to specify here the expected behavior if the consistency check never succeeds, `mef_eline` worst case it to keep trying to redeploy, but `telemetry_int` in the worst case, should it remove the flows and give up to fallback to `mef_eline`? and then only try to activate/redeploy again if the EVC is active but also proxy ports are all set?

Author: Whatever the final decision on this related thread here https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/402/files#r1276699359, it should probably follow the same behavior since ultimately `telemetry_int` is essentially "shadowing" `mef_eline` flows with higher priority ones and `mef_eline`'s is the one responsible for finding paths with the parametrized options.

Author: The main gotcha if it were to fall back and delete flows, is that consistency check wouldn't make sense from telemetry_int perspective to run again, since it'd be running the same consistency as mef_eline, and it can end up in a cycle in the worst case if a wrong action were to be installed. 

If a fallback to mef_eline is desirable when INT consistency check fails after a few attempts, then it should probably just disable INT and update status & status_reason metadata accordingly too. Consistency check from a INT perspective will only fail if flows haven't been installed yet or if indeed flows have wrong match or actions. So, as long as it doesn't pre-maturely use a short interval it should perform relatively stable. Mentioning these points just so you all are aware and we can make a decision of the behavior you need implemented.

Author: Final verdict: consistency check will disable INT (disable and remove the flows) if it fails after a few attempts in this first version. Updated the text on https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/402/commits/c2330dce57198b2588b2b277402da8b9d7dde937

XII. Pacing
===========

The **telemetry_int** napp must wait a *settings.wait_to_deploy* interval before sending instructions to the flow_manager after EVCs are created/modified/redeployed to avoid overwhelming the switches. The goal is to create batch operations.

XIII. Implementation details ``v1``
===================================

The following requirements clarify certain details and expected behavior for ``telemetry_int`` v1 that will be shipped with Kytos-ng ``2023.2``:

- ``mef_eline`` EVC ``telemetry`` metadata is managed by ``telemetry_int``, **only ``telemetry_int`` is supposed to write or delete it**. If you enable or disable INT you should call ``POST /telemetry_int/v1/evc/enable`` or ``POST /telemetry_int/v1/evc/disable``  endpoints. ``telemetry_int`` will not listen for EVC metadata changes since it'll manage it.

> - Once ``mef_eline`` creates and EVC, it'll can optionally request that INT should be provisioned. For this case, a ``telemetry_request: dict`` needs to be set in the metadata, currently no keys are needed, but as more options are supported in the future, they can be set. If ``telemetry_int`` can't provision ``telemetry_int``, then it'll set the ``telemetry: {"status": "disabled", "status_reason": ["<reason>"]}`` metadata, updating the status and filling out the reason accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once ``mef_eline`` creates an EVC, it can optionally request that INT be provisioned. For this case, a ``telemetry_request: dict`` needs to be set in the metadata, currently no keys are needed, but as more options are supported in the future, they can be set. If ``telemetry_int`` can't provision ``telemetry_int``, then it'll set the ``telemetry: {"status": "disabled", "status_reason": ["<reason>"]}`` metadata, updating the status and filling out the reason accordingly.
```

Author: Thanks, Italo, let me apply this patch.

- Currently, EVCs are always bidirectional. ``telemetry_int`` v1 iteration, will also follow the bidirectional flows as described in the prior sections. In the future, when ``mef_eline`` starts to support unidirectional flows, then following the flows should be mostly seamless, this facilitates implementation and code maintenance without having to try to derive the direction of all flows and maintain a structure that ``mef_eline`` still doesn't support.

> - ``telemetry_int`` will require a looped link on each source sink for both intra and inter EVCs, if it's not present, then ``telemetry_int`` will not enable INT, which implies that in this v1 iteration, you'll need to always have a proxy port (check out EP033 for more information) associated with both UNIs since the EVC is bidirectional. Although the EVC is bidirectional, the looped ports are used unidirectionally for each INT source. This explicitness of always knowing that both UNIs will need a proxy port facilitates to keep track when a proxy port changes and performing a side effect.

Author: Looks like there was a possibility of not using loops for inter EVCs as mentioned [on EP033](https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/blob/master/docs/blueprints/EP033.rst), but in the initial prototype both (inter and intra) were requiring a loop, so I'm assuming that'd be case, let me know if I misunderstood or if indeed INT will always require a loop for both cases
